Urashima was a fisherman of the Inland Sea.
Every night he plied his trade. He caught fishes both great and small,
being upon the sea through the long hours of darkness. Thus he made his
living.
Upon a certain night the moon shone brightly, making plain the paths of
the sea. And Urashima kneeled in his boat and dabbled his right hand in
the green water. Low he leaned, till his hair lay spread upon the waves,
and he paid no heed to his boat that listed or to his trailing
fishing-net. He drifted in his boat till he came to a haunted place. And
he was neither waking nor sleeping, for the moon made him mad.
Then the Daughter of the Deep Sea arose, and she took the fisherman in
her arms, and sank with him, down, down, to her cold sea cave. She laid
him upon a sandy bed, and long did she look upon him. She cast her sea
spell upon him, and sang her sea songs to him and held his eyes with
hers.
He said, “Who are you, lady?”
She told him, “The Daughter of the Deep Sea.”
“Let me go home,” he said; “my little children wait and are tired.”
“Nay, rather stay with me,” she said:
“Urashima,
Thou Fisherman of the Inland Sea,
Thou art beautiful;
Thy long hair is twisted round my heart;
Go not from me,
Only forget thy home.”
“Ah, now,” said the fisherman, “let be, for the dear gods’ sake.... I
would go to mine own.”
But she said again:
“Urashima,
Thou Fisherman of the Inland Sea,
I’ll set thy couch with pearl;
I’ll spread thy couch with seaweed and sea flowers;
Thou shalt be King of the Deep Sea,
And we will reign together.”
“Let me go home,” said Urashima; “my little children wait and are
tired.”
But she said:
“Urashima:
Thou Fisherman of the Inland Sea,
Never be afraid of the Deep Sea tempest;
We will roll rocks about our cavern doors;
Neither be afraid of the drowned dead;
Thou shalt not die.”
“Ah, now,” said the fisherman, “let be, for the dear gods’ sake.... I
would go to mine own.”
“Stay with me this one night.”
“Nay, not one.”
Then the Daughter of the Deep Sea wept, and Urashima saw her tears.
“I will stay with you this one night,” he said.
So after the night was passed, she brought him up to the sand and the
seashore.
“Are we near your home?” she said.
He told her, “Within a stone’s throw.”
“Take this,” she said, “in memory of me.” She gave him a casket of
mother-of-pearl; it was rainbow-tinted and its clasps were of coral and
of jade.
“Do not open it,” she said; “O fisherman, do not open it.” And with that
she sank and was no more seen, the Daughter of the Deep Sea.
As for Urashima, he ran beneath the pine trees to come to his dear home.
And as he went he laughed for joy. And he tossed up the casket to catch
the sun.
“Ah, me,” he said, “the sweet scent of the pines!” So he went calling to
his children with a call that he had taught them, like a sea-bird’s
note. Soon he said, “Are they yet asleep? It is strange they do not
answer me.”
Now when he came to his house he found four lonely walls, moss-grown.
Nightshade flourished on the threshold, death lilies by the hearth,
dianthus and lady fern. No living soul was there.
“Now what is this?” cried Urashima. “Have I lost my wits? Have I left
my eyes in the deep sea?”
He sat down upon the grassy floor and thought long. “The dear gods help
me!” he said. “Where is my wife, and where are my little children?”
He went to the village, where he knew the stones in the way, and every
tiled and tilted eave was to him most familiar; and here he found folk
walking to and fro, going upon their business. But they were all strange
to him.
“Good morrow,” they said, “good morrow, wayfarer. Do you tarry in our
town?”
He saw children at their play, and often he put his hand beneath their
chins to turn their faces up. Alas! he did it all in vain.
“Where are my little children,” he said, “O Lady Kwannon the Merciful?
Peradventure the gods know the meaning of all this; it is too much for
me.”
When sunset came, his heart was heavy as stone, and he went and stood at
the parting of the ways outside the town. As men passed by he pulled
them by the sleeve:
“Friend,” he said, “I ask your pardon, did you know a fisherman of this
place called Urashima?”
And the men that passed by answered him, “We never heard of such an
one.”
There passed by the peasant people from the mountains. Some went a-foot,
some rode on patient pack-horses. They went singing their country songs,
and they carried baskets of wild strawberries or sheaves of lilies
bound upon their backs. And the lilies nodded as they went. Pilgrims
passed by, all clad in white, with staves and rice-straw hats, sandals
fast bound and gourds of water. Swiftly they went, softly they went,
thinking of holy things. And lords and ladies passed by, in brave attire
and great array, borne in their gilded _kago_. The night fell.
“I lose sweet hope,” said Urashima.
But there passed by an old, old man.
“Oh, old, old man,” cried the fisherman, “you have seen many days; know
you ought of Urashima? In this place was he born and bred.”
Then the old man said, “There was one of that name, but, sir, that one
was drowned long years ago. My grandfather could scarce remember him in
the time that I was a little boy. Good stranger, it was many, many years
ago.”
Urashima said, “He is dead?”
“No man more dead than he. His sons are dead and their sons are dead.
Good even to you, stranger.”
Then Urashima was afraid. But he said, “I must go to the green valley
where the dead sleep.” And to the valley he took his way.
He said, “How chill the night wind blows through the grass! The trees
shiver and the leaves turn their pale backs to me.”
He said, “Hail, sad moon, that showest me all the quiet graves. Thou art
nothing different from the moon of old.”
He said, “Here are my sons’ graves and their sons’ graves. Poor
Urashima, there is no man more dead than he. Yet am I lonely among the
ghosts....”
“Who will comfort me?” said Urashima.
The night wind sighed and nothing more.
Then he went back to the seashore. “Who will comfort me?” cried
Urashima. But the sky was unmoved, and the mountain waves of the sea
rolled on.
Urashima said, “There is the casket.” And he took it from his sleeve and
opened it. There rose from it a faint white smoke that floated away and
out to the far horizon.
“I grow very weary,” said Urashima. In a moment his hair turned as white
as snow. He trembled, his body shrank, his eyes grew dim. He that had
been so young and lusty swayed and tottered where he stood.
“I am old,” said Urashima.
He made to shut the casket lid, but dropped it, saying, “Nay, the vapour
of smoke is gone for ever. What matters it?”
He laid down his length upon the sand and died.
XXVIII
TAMAMO, THE FOX MAIDEN
A pedlar journeyed with his pack upon the great high-road which leads to
the city of Kioto. He found a child sitting all alone by the wayside.
“Well, my little girl,” he said, “and what make you all alone by the
wayside?”
“What do you,” said the child, “with a staff and a pack, and sandals
outworn?”
“I am bound for Kioto, and the Mikado’s Palace, to sell my gauds to the
ladies of the Court.”
“Ah,” said the child, “take me too.”
“What is your name, my little girl?”
“I have no name.”
“Whence come you?”
“I come from nowhere.”
“You seem to be about seven years old.”
“I have no age.”
“Why are you here?”
“I have been waiting for you.”
“How long have you waited?”
“For more than a hundred years.”
The Pedlar laughed.
“Take me to Kioto,” said the child.
“You may come if you will,” said the Pedlar. So they went their ways
together, and in time they came to Kioto and to the Mikado’s Palace.
Here the child danced in the august presence of the Son of Heaven. She
was as light as the sea-bird upon a wave’s crest. When she had made an
end of dancing, the Mikado called her to him.
“Little maid,” he said, “what guerdon shall I give you? Ask!”
“O Divinely Descended,” said the child, “Son of the Gods ... I cannot
ask.... I am afraid.”
“Ask without fear,” said the Mikado.
The child murmured, “Let me stay in the bright presence of your
Augustness.”
“So be it,” said the Mikado, and he received the child into his
household. And he called her Tamamo.
Very speedily she became mistress of every lovely art. She could sing,
and she could play upon any instrument of music. She had more skill in
painting than any painter in the land; she was a wonder with the needle
and a wonder at the loom. The poetry that she made moved men to tears
and to laughter. The many thousand characters were child’s play to her,
and all the hard philosophies she had at her fingers’ ends. She knew
Confucius well enough, the Scriptures of Buddha, and the lore of Cathay.
She was called the Exquisite Perfection, the Gold Unalloyed, the Jewel
without Flaw.
And the Mikado loved her.
Soon he clean forgot honour and duty and kingly state. Day and night he
kept Tamamo by his side. He grew rough and fierce and passionate, so
that his servants feared to approach him. He grew sick, listless, and
languid, he pined, and his physicians could do nothing for him.
“Alas and alack,” they cried, “what ails the Divinely Descended? Of a
surety he is bewitched. Woe! woe! for he will die upon our hands.”
“Out upon them, every one,” cried the Mikado, “for a pack of tedious
fools. As for me, I will do my own will and pleasure.”
He was mad for love of Tamamo.
He took her to his Summer Palace, where he prepared a great feast in her
honour. To the feast were bidden all the highest of the land, princes
and lords and ladies of high estate; and, willy-nilly, to the Summer
Palace they all repaired, where was the Mikado, wan and wild, and mad
with love, and Tamamo by his side, attired in scarlet and cloth of gold.
Radiantly fair she was, and she poured the Mikado’s _saké_ out of a
golden flagon.
He looked into her eyes.
“Other women are feeble toys beside you,” he said. “There’s not a woman
here that’s fit to touch the end of your sleeve. O Tamamo, how I love
you....”
He spoke loudly so that all could hear him, and laughed bitterly when he
had spoken.
“My lord ... my lord ...” said Tamamo.
Now as the high company sat and feasted, the sky became overcast with
black clouds, and the moon and the stars were hid. Suddenly a fearful
wind tore through the Summer Palace and put out every torch in the great
Hall of Feasting. And the rain came down in torrents. In the pitchy
darkness fear and horror fell upon the assembly. The courtiers ran to
and fro in a panic, the air was full of cries, the tables were
overturned. The dishes and drinking-vessels crashed together, the _saké_
spilled and soaked into the white mats. Then a radiance was made
visible. It came from the place where Tamamo was, and it streamed in
long flames of fire from her body.
The Mikado cried aloud in a terrible voice, “Tamamo! Tamamo! Tamamo!”
three times. And when he had done this he fell in a deathly swoon upon
the ground.
And for many days he was thus, and he seemed either asleep or dead, and
no one could recover him from his swoon.
Then the Wise and Holy Men of the land met together, and when they had
prayed to the gods, they called to them Abé Yasu, the Diviner. They
said:
“O Abé Yasu, learned in dark things, find out for us the cause, and if
it may be, the cure, of our Lord’s strange sickness. Perform divination
for us, O Abé Yasu.”
Then Abé Yasu performed divination, and he came before the Wise Men and
said:
“The wine is sweet, but the aftertaste is bitter.
Set not your teeth in the golden persimmon,
It is rotten at the core.
Fair is the scarlet flower of the Death Lily,
Pluck it not.
What is beauty?
What is wisdom?
What is love?
Be not deceived. They are threads in the fabric of illusion!”
Then the Wise Men said, “Speak out, Abé Yasu, for your saying is dark,
and we cannot understand it.”
“I will do more than speak,” said Abé Yasu. And he spent three days in
fasting and in prayer. Then he took the sacred _Gohei_ from its place in
the Temple, and calling the Wise Men to him he waved the sacred _Gohei_
and with it touched each one of them. And together they went to Tamamo’s
bower, and Abé Yasu took the sacred _Gohei_ in his right hand.
Tamamo was in her bower adorning herself, and her maidens were with her.
“My lords,” she said, “you come all unbidden. What would you have with
me?”
“My lady Tamamo,” said Abé Yasu the Diviner, “I have made a song after
the fashion of the Chinese. You who are learned in poetry, I pray you
hear and judge my song.”
“I am in no mood for songs,” she said, “with my dear lord lying sick to
death.”
“Nevertheless, my lady Tamamo, this song of mine you needs must hear.”
“Why, then, if I must ...” she said.
Then spoke Abé Yasu:
“The wine is sweet, the aftertaste is bitter.
Set not your teeth in the golden persimmon,
It is rotten at the core.
Fair is the scarlet flower of the Death Lily,
Pluck it not.
What is beauty?
What is wisdom?
What is love?
Be not deceived. They are threads in the fabric of illusion!”
When Abé Yasu the Diviner had spoken, he came to Tamamo and he touched
her with the sacred _Gohei_.
She gave a loud and terrible cry, and on the instant her form was
changed into that of a great fox having nine long tails and hair like
golden wire. The fox fled from Tamamo’s bower, away and away, until it
reached the far plain of Nasu, and it hid itself beneath a great black
stone that was upon that plain.
But the Mikado was immediately recovered from his sickness.
Soon, strange and terrible things were told concerning the great stone
of Nasu. A stream of poisonous water flowed from under it and withered
the bright flowers of the plain. All who drank of the stream died, both
man and beast. Moreover, nothing could go near the stone and live. The
traveller who rested in its shadow arose no more, and the birds that
perched upon it fell dead in a moment. People named it the Death Stone,
and thus it was called for more than a hundred years.
Then it chanced that Genyo, the High Priest, who was a holy man indeed,
took his staff and his begging bowl and went upon a pilgrimage.
When he came to Nasu, the dwellers upon the plain put rice into his
bowl.
“O thou Holy Man,” they said, “beware the Death Stone of Nasu. Rest not
in its shade.”
But Genyo, the High Priest, having remained a while in thought, made
answer thus:
“Know, my children, what is written in the Book of the Good Law: ‘Herbs,
trees and rocks shall all enter into Nirvana.’”
With that he took his way to the Death Stone. He burnt incense, he
struck the stone with his staff, and he cried, “Come forth, Spirit of
the Death Stone; come forth, I conjure thee.”
Then there was a great flame of fire and a rending noise, and the Stone
burst and split in sunder. From the stone and from the fire there came a
woman.
She stood before the Holy Man. She said:
“I am Tamamo, once called the Proud Perfection;
I am the golden-haired Fox;
I know the Sorceries of the East;
I was worshipped by the Princes of Ind;
I was great Cathay’s undoing;
I was wise and beautiful,
Evil incarnate.
The power of the Buddha has changed me;
I have dwelt in grief for a hundred years;
Tears have washed away my beauty and my sin.
Shrive me, Genyo, shrive me, Holy Man;
Let me have peace.”
“Poor Spirit,” said Genyo. “Take my staff and my priestly robe and my
begging bowl and set forth upon the long journey of repentance.”
Tamamo took the priestly robe and put it upon her; in one hand she took
the staff, in the other the bowl. And when she had done this, she
vanished for ever from the sight of earthly men.
“O thou, Tathagatha,” said Genyo, “and thou, Kwannon, Merciful Lady,
make it possible that one day even she may attain Nirvana.”
